{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 Arial;}}\fs22
# EXPERIMENT 3\par
\par
## TITLE\par
\par
Containerization, Git Version Control, GitHub, and Docker Hub Deployment\par
\par
## AIM\par
\par
To containerize RoadSense AI using Docker, maintain the project using Git version control, and prepare the project for GitHub and Docker Hub publication.\par
\par
## SOFTWARE USED\par
\par
- Docker Desktop\par
- Docker Compose\par
- Git\par
- GitHub\par
- Docker Hub\par
\par
## PROCEDURE\par
\par
The project was initialized as a Git repository. All files were staged and committed using Git commands. A backend Dockerfile was created using the `python:3.10-slim` base image. It installs dependencies from `requirements.txt`, copies backend source files, exposes port 8000, and starts Uvicorn.\par
\par
A frontend Dockerfile was created using `nginx:1.25-alpine`. It copies static HTML, CSS, and JavaScript files into the Nginx web directory and exposes port 80. Docker Compose was configured to run the backend, frontend, and Redis service together.\par
\par
The Docker publishing script `scripts/docker_publish.sh` was created to build and push backend and frontend images to Docker Hub.\par
\par
## GIT COMMANDS USED\par
\par
```bash\par
git init\par
git add .\par
git commit -m "Build RoadSense AI mini project"\par
git commit -m "Add shareable submission package and local runner"\par
git status\par
```\par
\par
## DOCKER COMMANDS USED\par
\par
```bash\par
docker compose up --build\par
docker build -t yourusername/roadsense-ai-backend:latest ./backend\par
docker build -t yourusername/roadsense-ai-frontend:latest ./frontend\par
docker push yourusername/roadsense-ai-backend:latest\par
docker push yourusername/roadsense-ai-frontend:latest\par
```\par
\par
## FILES CREATED\par
\par
- `backend/Dockerfile`\par
- `frontend/Dockerfile`\par
- `docker-compose.yml`\par
- `scripts/build_and_run.sh`\par
- `scripts/docker_publish.sh`\par
\par
## FIGURES TO ADD\par
\par
Figure 3.1: Git commit history  \par
Figure 3.2: Docker Compose configuration  \par
Figure 3.3: Docker build output  \par
Figure 3.4: Docker images listed locally  \par
Figure 3.5: Docker Hub repository page  \par
Figure 3.6: GitHub repository page\par
\par
## RESULT\par
\par
RoadSense AI was successfully prepared for GitHub and Docker Hub publication. The application includes separate Docker images for backend and frontend services.\par

}