{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 Arial;}}\fs22
# EXPERIMENT 2\par
\par
## TITLE\par
\par
Inference Engine and REST API Deployment for RoadSense AI\par
\par
## AIM\par
\par
To implement an inference API for RoadSense AI using FastAPI and ONNX Runtime and verify that uploaded road images return analytics results.\par
\par
## SOFTWARE USED\par
\par
- FastAPI\par
- Uvicorn\par
- ONNX Runtime\par
- OpenCV\par
- Python Multipart\par
- Swagger UI\par
\par
## API ENDPOINTS\par
\par
| Endpoint | Method | Purpose |\par
|---|---|---|\par
| `/` | GET | Root API message |\par
| `/api/v1/health` | GET | Checks backend, ONNX, and LLM availability |\par
| `/api/v1/detect` | POST | Performs image analysis and returns annotated image |\par
| `/api/v1/analyze` | POST | Returns analytics without annotated image |\par
| `/api/v1/plan` | POST | Generates repair plan from manual detection data |\par
\par
## PROCEDURE\par
\par
1. FastAPI was selected as the REST inference framework.\par
2. Required packages were listed in `backend/requirements.txt`.\par
3. The backend application was implemented in `backend/main.py`.\par
4. The `/api/v1/health` endpoint was created to confirm service status.\par
5. The `/api/v1/detect` endpoint was created for full image analysis.\par
6. The `/api/v1/analyze` endpoint was created for lightweight analytics.\par
7. The `/api/v1/plan` endpoint was created to test the Civic Repair Planner independently.\par
8. Swagger UI was used to verify and document the API.\par
\par
## SAMPLE TEST COMMAND\par
\par
```bash\par
curl -F "file=@sample_road.jpg" http://localhost:8000/api/v1/analyze\par
```\par
\par
## SAMPLE OUTPUT\par
\par
```json\par
\{\par
  "num_detections": 4,\par
  "severity_score": 0.2129,\par
  "repair_priority": "HIGH",\par
  "civic_repair_plan": \{\par
    "estimated_cost_inr": 12100,\par
    "crew_size": 2,\par
    "sla_hours": 72,\par
    "lane_closure": "Partial lane closure with warning barricades",\par
    "risk_zone": "GREEN"\par
  \}\par
\}\par
```\par
\par
## FIGURES TO ADD\par
\par
Figure 2.1: FastAPI Swagger UI page  \par
Figure 2.2: Health API response  \par
Figure 2.3: Analyze endpoint test using Swagger or curl  \par
Figure 2.4: JSON response containing Civic Repair Planner output\par
\par
## RESULT\par
\par
The RoadSense AI backend inference API was successfully implemented and tested. The API returns road damage analytics, severity, priority, and repair planning details.\par

}