{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 Arial;}}\fs22
# FINAL PROJECT COMPILATION\par
\par
## PROJECT TITLE\par
\par
RoadSense AI: Road Damage Detection with Civic Repair Planning\par
\par
## CONTENTS\par
\par
1. Project customization report\par
2. Inference and API report\par
3. Docker, GitHub, and Docker Hub report\par
4. Kubernetes deployment report\par
5. Software product paper\par
6. Architecture diagram\par
7. Source code ZIP\par
\par
## PROJECT SUMMARY\par
\par
RoadSense AI is a complete SEAI mini project built around road damage detection. It uses a FastAPI backend, browser frontend, ONNX-ready inference flow, Docker configuration, Kubernetes deployment file, Git version control, and a Software Impacts-style paper.\par
\par
## NOVELTY SUMMARY\par
\par
The main novelty is the Civic Repair Planner. It turns road damage detections into repair cost, crew size, SLA hours, lane closure requirement, risk zone, SDG alignment, and dispatch note. This makes the system more useful than a simple object detection demo.\par
\par
## RUNNING STATUS\par
\par
The project has been tested locally using Python virtual environment mode.\par
\par
Frontend URL:\par
\par
```text\par
http://localhost:3000\par
```\par
\par
Backend API URL:\par
\par
```text\par
http://localhost:8000/docs\par
```\par
\par
Health endpoint output:\par
\par
```text\par
status: ok\par
model_loaded: false\par
onnx_available: true\par
llm_available: false\par
```\par
\par
The project works in demo mode when the ONNX model file is not available.\par
\par
## FILES FOR SUBMISSION\par
\par
- RoadSense_AI_Project_Customization_Report.docx\par
- RoadSense_AI_Inference_and_API_Report.docx\par
- RoadSense_AI_Docker_GitHub_Report.docx\par
- RoadSense_AI_Kubernetes_Report.docx\par
- RoadSense_AI_Software_Paper_Work.docx\par
- RoadSense_AI_Final_Compiled_Report.docx\par
- RoadSense_AI_Project_Source.zip\par
\par
## FINAL RESULT\par
\par
The RoadSense AI mini project is ready for submission and GitHub upload. The remaining external task is to create a GitHub repository and push the local Git project to it.\par

}